After having been twice driven back by heavy southwestern gales, her majesty's 
ship beagle, a ten-gun brig, under the command of captain fitz roy, r. n., 
sailed from devonport on the 27th of december, 1831. The object of the 
expedition was to complete the survey of patagonia and tierra del fuego, 
commenced under captain king in 1826 to 1830, -- to survey the shores of chile, 
peru, and of some islands in the pacific -- and to carry a chain of 
chronometrical measurements round the world. On the 6th of january we reached 
teneriffe, but were prevented landing, by fears of our bringing the cholera: 
the next morning we saw the sun rise behind the rugged outline of the grand 
canary island, and suddenly illuminate the peak of teneriffe, whilst the lower 
parts were veiled in fleecy clouds. This was the first of many delightful days 
never to be forgotten.
 
On the 16th of january, 1832, we anchored at porto praya, in st. jago, the 
chief island of the cape de verd archipelago. The neighbourhood of porto praya, 
viewed from the sea, wears a desolate aspect. The volcanic fires of a past age, 
and the scorching heat of a tropical sun, have in most places rendered the soil 
unfit for vegetation. The country rises in successive steps of table-land, 
interspersed with some truncate conical hills, and the horizon is bounded by an 
irregular chain of more lofty mountains.
 
The scene, as beheld through the hazy atmosphere of this climate, is one of 
great interest; if, indeed, a person, fresh from sea, and who has just walked, 
for the first time, in a grove of cocoa-nut trees, can be a judge of anything 
but his own happiness. The island would generally be considered as very 
uninteresting, but to anyone accustomed only to an english landscape, the novel 
aspect of an utterly sterile land possesses a grandeur which more vegetation 
might spoil. A single green leaf can scarcely be discovered over wide tracts of 
the lava plains; yet flocks of goats, together with a few cows, contrive to 
exist. It rains very seldom, but during a short portion of the year heavy 
torrents fall, and immediately afterwards a light vegetation springs out of 
every crevice.
 
This soon withers; and upon such naturally formed hay the animals live. It had 
not now rained for an entire year. When the island was discovered, the 
immediate neighbourhood of porto praya was clothed with trees [note 1], the 
reckless destruction of which has caused here, as at st. helena, and at some of 
the canary islands, almost entire sterility. The broad, flat-bottomed valleys, 
many of which serve during a few days only in the season as water-courses, are 
clothed with thickets of leafless bushes.
 
Few living creatures inhabit these valleys. The commonest bird is a kingfisher 
(dacelo iagoensis), which tamely sits on the branches of the castor- oil plant, 
and thence darts on grasshoppers and lizards. It is brightly coloured, but not 
so beautiful as the european species: in its flight, manners, and place of 
habitation, which is generally in the driest valley, there is also a wide 
difference. One day, two of the officers and myself rode to ribeira grande, a 
village a few miles eastward of porto praya.
 
Until we reached the valley of st. martin, the country presented its usual dull 
brown appearance; but here, a very small rill of water produces a most 
refreshing margin of luxuriant vegetation. In the course of an hour we arrived 
at ribeira grande, and were surprised at the sight of a large ruined fort and 
cathedral. This little town, before its harbour was filled up, was the 
principal place in the island: it now presents a melancholy, but very 
picturesque appearance. Having procured a black padre for a guide, and a 
spaniard who had served in the peninsular war as an interpreter, we visited a 
collection of buildings, of which an ancient church formed the principal part.
 
It is here the governors and captain-generals of the islands have been 
buried. Some of the tombstones recorded dates of the sixteenth century [note 
2]. The heraldic ornaments were the only things in this retired place that 
reminded us of europe. The church or chapel formed one side of a quadrangle, in 
the middle of which a large clump of bananas were growing.
 
On another side was a hospital, containing about a dozen miserable-looking 
inmates. We returned to the venda to eat our dinners. A considerable number of 
men, women, and children, all as black as jet, collected to watch us. Our 
companions were extremely merry; and everything we said or did was followed by 
their hearty laughter.
 
Before leaving the town we visited the cathedral. It does not appear so rich as 
the smaller church, but boasts of a little organ, which sent forth singularly 
inharmonious cries. We presented the black priest with a few shillings, and the 
spaniard, patting him on the head, said, with much candour, he thought his 
colour made no great difference. We then returned, as fast as the ponies would 
go, to porto praya.
 
Another day we rode to the village of st. domingo, situated near the centre of 
the island. On a small plain which we crossed, a few stunted acacias were 
growing; their tops had been bent by the steady trade-wind, in a singular 
manner -- some of them even at right angles to their trunks. The direction of 
the branches was exactly n. e. by n., and s. w. by s., and these natural vanes 
must indicate the prevailing direction of the force of the trade-wind. The 
travelling had made so little impression on the barren soil, that we here 
missed our track, and took that to fuentes.
 
This we did not find out till we arrived there; and we were afterwards glad of 
our mistake. Fuentes is a pretty village, with a small stream; and everything 
appeared to prosper well, excepting, indeed, that which ought to do so most -- 
its inhabitants. The black children, completely naked, and looking very 
wretched, were carrying bundles of firewood half as big as their own 
bodies. Near fuentes we saw a large flock of guinea-fowl -- probably fifty or 
sixty in number.
 
They were extremely wary, and could not be approached. They avoided us, like 
partridges on a rainy day in september, running with their heads cocked up; and 
if pursued, they readily took to the wing. The scenery of st. domingo possesses 
a beauty totally unexpected, from the prevalent gloomy character of the rest of 
the island. The village is situated at the bottom of a valley, bounded by lofty 
and jagged walls of stratified lava.
 
The black rocks afford a most striking contrast with the bright green 
vegetation, which follows the banks of a little stream of clear water. It 
happened to be a grand feast-day, and the village was full of people. On our 
return we overtook a party of about twenty young black girls, dressed in 
excellent taste; their black skins and snow-white linen being set off by 
coloured turbans and large shawls. As soon as we approached near, they suddenly 
all turned round, and covering the path with their shawls, sung with great 
energy a wild song, beating time with their hands upon their legs.
 
We threw them some vintems, which were received with screams of laughter, and 
we left them redoubling the noise of their song. One morning the view was 
singularly clear; the distant mountains being projected with the sharpest 
outline on a heavy bank of dark blue clouds. Judging from the appearance, and 
from similar cases in england, i supposed that the air was saturated with 
moisture. The fact, however, turned out quite the contrary.
 
The hygrometer gave a difference of 29.6 degs., between the temperature of the 
air, and the point at which dew was precipitated. This difference was nearly 
double that which i had observed on the previous mornings. This unusual degree 
of atmospheric dryness was accompanied by continual flashes of lightning. Is it 
not an uncommon case, thus to find a remarkable degree of aerial transparency 
with such a state of weather?
 
Generally the atmosphere is hazy; and this is caused by the falling of 
impalpably fine dust, which was found to have slightly injured the astronomical 
instruments. The morning before we anchored at porto praya, i collected a 
little packet of this brown-coloured fine dust, which appeared to have been 
filtered from the wind by the gauze of the vane at the masthead. Mr. lyell has 
also given me four packets of dust which fell on a vessel a few hundred miles 
northward of these islands. Professor ehrenberg [note 3] finds that this dust 
consists in great part of infusoria with siliceous shields, and of the 
siliceous tissue of plants.
 
In five little packets which i sent him, he has ascertained no less than 
sixty-seven different organic forms! The infusoria, with the exception of two 
marine species, are all inhabitants of fresh-water. I have found no less than 
fifteen different accounts of dust having fallen on vessels when far out in the 
atlantic. From the direction of the wind whenever it has fallen, and from its 
having always fallen during those months when the harmattan is known to raise 
clouds of dust high into the atmosphere, we may feel sure that it all comes 
from africa.
 
It is, however, a very singular fact, that, although professor ehrenberg knows 
many species of infusoria peculiar to africa, he finds none of these in the 
dust which i sent him. On the other hand, he finds in it two species which 
hitherto he knows as living only in south america. The dust falls in such 
quantities as to dirty everything on board, and to hurt people's eyes; vessels 
even have run on shore owing to the obscurity of the atmosphere. It has often 
fallen on ships when several hundred, and even more than a thousand miles from 
the coast of africa, and at points sixteen hundred miles distant in a north and 
south direction.
 
In some dust which was collected on a vessel three hundred miles from the land, 
i was much surprised to find particles of stone above the thousandth of an inch 
square, mixed with finer matter. After this fact one need not be surprised at 
the diffusion of the far lighter and smaller sporules of cryptogamic 
plants. The geology of this island is the most interesting part of its natural 
history. On entering the harbour, a perfectly horizontal white band, in the 
face of the sea cliff, may be seen running for some miles along the coast, and 
at the height of about forty-five feet above the water.
 
Upon examination this white stratum is found to consist of calcareous matter 
with numerous shells embedded, most or all of which now exist on the 
neighbouring coast. It rests on ancient volcanic rocks, and has been covered by 
a stream of basalt, which must have entered the sea when the white shelly bed 
was lying at the bottom. It is interesting to trace the changes produced by the 
heat of the overlying lava, on the friable mass, which in parts has been 
converted into a crystalline limestone, and in other parts into a compact 
spotted stone where the lime has been caught up by the scoriaceous fragments of 
the lower surface of the stream, it is converted into groups of beautifully 
radiated fibres resembling arragonite. The beds of lava rise in successive 
gently-sloping plains, towards the interior, whence the deluges of melted stone 
have originally proceeded.
 
Within historical times, no signs of volcanic activity have, i believe, been 
manifested in any part of st. jago. Even the form of a crater can but rarely be 
discovered on the summits of the many red cindery hills; yet the more recent 
streams can be distinguished on the coast, forming lines of cliffs of less 
height, but stretching out in advance of those belonging to an older series: 
the height of the cliffs thus affording a rude measure of the age of the 
streams. During our stay, i observed the habits of some marine animals. A large 
aplysia is very common.
 
This sea-slug is about five inches long; and is of a dirty yellowish colour 
veined with purple. On each side of the lower surface, or foot, there is a 
broad membrane, which appears sometimes to act as a ventilator, in causing a 
current of water to flow over the dorsal branchiae or lungs. It feeds on the 
delicate sea-weeds which grow among the stones in muddy and shallow water; and 
i found in its stomach several small pebbles, as in the gizzard of a bird. This 
slug, when disturbed, emits a very fine purplish-red fluid, which stains the 
water for the space of a foot around.
 
Besides this means of defence, an acrid secretion, which is spread over its 
body, causes a sharp, stinging sensation, similar to that produced by the 
physalia, or portuguese man-of-war. I was much interested, on several 
occasions, by watching the habits of an octopus, or cuttle-fish. Although 
common in the pools of water left by the retiring tide, these animals were not 
easily caught. By means of their long arms and suckers, they could drag their 
bodies into very narrow crevices; and when thus fixed, it required great force 
to remove them.
 
At other times they darted tail first, with the rapidity of an arrow, from one 
side of the pool to the other, at the same instant discolouring the water with 
a dark chestnut-brown ink. These animals also escape detection by a very 
extraordinary, chameleon-like power of changing their colour. They appear to 
vary their tints according to the nature of the ground over which they pass: 
when in deep water, their general shade was brownish purple, but when placed on 
the land, or in shallow water, this dark tint changed into one of a yellowish 
green. The colour, examined more carefully, was a french grey, with numerous 
minute spots of bright yellow: the former of these varied in intensity; the 
latter entirely disappeared and appeared again by turns.
 
These changes were effected in such a manner, that clouds, varying in tint 
between a hyacinth red and a chestnut-brown [note 4], were continually passing 
over the body. Any part, being subjected to a slight shock of galvanism, became 
almost black: a similar effect, but in a less degree, was produced by 
scratching the skin with a needle. These clouds, or blushes as they may be 
called, are said to be produced by the alternate expansion and contraction of 
minute vesicles containing variously coloured fluids [note 5]. This cuttle-fish 
displayed its chameleon-like power both during the act of swimming and whilst 
remaining stationary at the bottom.
 
I was much amused by the various arts to escape detection used by one 
individual, which seemed fully aware that i was watching it. Remaining for a 
time motionless, it would then stealthily advance an inch or two, like a cat 
after a mouse; sometimes changing its colour: it thus proceeded, till having 
gained a deeper part, it darted away, leaving a dusky train of ink to hide the 
hole into which it had crawled. While looking for marine animals, with my head 
about two feet above the rocky shore, i was more than once saluted by a jet of 
water, accompanied by a slight grating noise. At first i could not think what 
it was, but afterwards i found out that it was this cuttle-fish, which, though 
concealed in a hole, thus often led me to its discovery.
 
That it possesses the power of ejecting water there is no doubt, and it 
appeared to me that it could certainly take good aim by directing the tube or 
siphon on the under side of its body. From the difficulty which these animals 
have in carrying their heads, they cannot crawl with ease when placed on the 
ground. I observed that one which i kept in the cabin was slightly 
phosphorescent in the dark. 
